---
outline: deep
---

# Query Builder Methods

This section describes all the query builder methods in detail.

## Introduction

The main query builder methods all work in a similar way with respect
to the arguments they accept.  The short form is to pass a string which
may have some additional processing applied to it (typically splitting
a whitespace delimited string into multiple tokens).  Where there
are two, three or four possible arguments, an array can be passed.
Or an object can be passed with explicit properties for the different
parameters.

All the methods can generate raw SQL.  This can be specified by
passing an object with a single `sql` property:

```js
db.select({ sql: 'COUNT(id) AS n' })
```

Or using the `sql` function to create a tagged template literal:

```js
import { sql } from '@abw/badger-database'

db.select(sql`COUNT(id) AS n`)
```

All of the methods can be called multiple times, or passed multiple
arguments.  They both have the same effect.  Generally speaking,
you can call the methods in any order and the query builder will
generate the SQL query with them in the correct order.

For the sake of brevity these examples assume that you've already
connected to a database and stored the connection in the `db` variable.

```js
import connect from '@abw/badger-database'

const db = connect({ database: 'sqlite:memory' });

// ...examples would go here

db.disconnect()
```

The examples show the SQL generated by the fragment.  In many cases they're
not complete queries and we've omitted the final `.sql()` method call
which is called internally to generate the SQL.

In these example we're assuming that the database is Sqlite which
quotes table and columns names using double quotes, e.g. `"users"."id"`.
For Mysql the names will be quoted using backticks.  Examples that
show placeholders also assume Sqlite (and Mysql) which uses question
marks, e.g. `?`.  For Postgress the placeholders are of the form `$1`,
`$2`, `$3`, etc.

## Query Types

Read more about the methods for specific query types:

* [select](select-query)
* [insert](insert-query)
* [udpate](update-query)
* [delete](delete-query)

Also see the documentation describing methods for executing queries:

* [Query Execution Methods](query-execute)